[feat][doc] Add docs for message dispatch throttling (#386)
apache/pulsar-site: docs/concepts-throttling.md

---
id: concepts-throttling
title: Message dispatch throttling
sidebar_label: "Message throttling"
---

## Overview

### What is message dispatch throttling?

Large message payloads can cause memory usage spikes that lead to performance decreases. Pulsar adopts a rate-limit throttling mechanism for message dispatch, avoiding a traffic surge and improving message deliverability. You can set a threshold to limit the number of messages and the byte size of entries that can be delivered to clients, blocking subsequent deliveries when the traffic per unit of time exceeds the threshold.

For example, when you configure the dispatch rate limit to 10 messages per second, then the number of messages that can be delivered to the client per second is up to 10.

![Rate-limit dispatch throttling](/assets/throttling-dispatch.svg)

### Why use it?

Message dispatch throttling brings the following benefits in detail:

> - **Limit broker’s read request loads to BookKeeper**

Reviewer: We may decide and consistently use either `‘` or `'`.

Author: Sharp eyes! It's weird that `'` in the google docs and other editors changes to `‘` in the markdown file after a copy&paste. There are 50+ occurrences in the current docs that might be due to the same cause. I'll get it all fixed soon.

  Messages are persistently stored in the BookKeeper cluster. If a large number of read requests cannot be fulfilled using the cached data, the BookKeeper cluster may become too busy to respond, and the broker's I/O or CPU resources can be fully occupied. Using the message dispatch throttling feature can regulate the data flow by limiting the broker’s I/O and CPU load, as well as BookKeeper’s read request load.

- **Balance the allocation of broker’s hardware resources at topic/subscription levels**

  A broker instance serves multiple topics at one time. If a topic is frequently looked up, it will occupy almost all of the I/O, CPU, and memory resources, causing other topics cannot be looked up. Using the message dispatch throttling feature can limit the allocation of broker’s hardware resources across topics.

- **Limit the allocation of client’s hardware resources at topic/subscription levels**

>   When there is a large backlog of messages to consume, clients may receive a large amount of data in a short period of time, which monopolizes their computing resources. Since the client has no mechanisms to proactively limit the consumption rate, using the message dispatch throttling feature can also regulate the allocation of the client’s hardware resources.

Reviewer: >  Since the client has no mechanisms to proactively limit the consumption rate

Why? `Consumer#receive` receives one message per call. Client app can define their consume logic.

Author: @poorbarcode can you pls take a look at this question?

Reviewer 2: The code that users consume messages often looks like this:

```java
while ((msg = consumer.receive()) != null){
    doService(msg)
}
```

Method `doService` costs more cpu, memory, and other resources than receiving messages. If there is a lot backlog in this topic( perhaps more than one topic ), then these threads of consumers will keep working busy, which puts other services( such as web service ) on the same machine at a disadvantage.

In a standard service, messages tend to be processed asynchronously (not high priority), so there are scenarios where customers need to limit the amount of system resources consumed by consuming messages to keep other services working

:::note

The dispatch rate limits configured at multiple levels take effect simultaneously (logical AND).

:::

### Throttling approaches

The following table outlines multiple approaches to configure the dispatch rate limits at different levels.

Approach | Per cluster | Per topic | Per subscription
:--------|:------------|:----------|:----------------
Set [broker configurations](#throttling-configurations) or [dynamic broker configurations](admin-api-brokers.md#dynamic-broker-configuration) | <li>`dispatchThrottlingRateInMsg`</li><li>`dispatchThrottlingRateInByte`</li> | <li>`dispatchThrottlingRatePerTopicInMsg`</li><li>`dispatchThrottlingRatePerTopicInByte`</li><br />It applies to all topics in the cluster. | <li>`dispatchThrottlingRatePerSubscriptionInMsg`</li><li>`dispatchThrottlingRatePerSubscriptionInByte`</li><br />It applies to all subscriptions in the cluster.
Set namespace policies | N/A | Refer to [Configure dispatch throttling for topics](admin-api-namespaces.md#configure-dispatch-throttling-for-topics). | Refer to [Configure dispatch throttling for subscriptions](admin-api-namespaces.md#configure-dispatch-throttling-for-subscription).

> Set topic policies | N/A | Refer to [Set topic-level dispatch rate](https://pulsar.apache.org/admin-rest-api/#operation/persistent_setDispatchRate). | Refer to [Set subscription-level dispatch rate](https://pulsar.apache.org/admin-rest-api/#operation/getSubscriptionLevelDispatchRate).<br />It applies to all subscriptions in a topic.

Reviewer 3: Please confirm if these links are in the correct MD format.

Author: This link validity has a dependency on https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/19193. I'll double-check it after https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/19193 is merged.

Reviewer 2: Hi @momo-jun 

Sorry, this PR should be terminated because I have found a better solution and I will submit a new PR next week or later.

Author: @poorbarcode Thanks for letting us know. Are you going to develop a new feature? Keep us posted. I'll close this PR when the new one is ready.

Reviewer 2: > Are you going to develop a new feature? Keep us posted. I'll close this PR when the new one is ready.

No. I will just rewrite the PR https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/19193.

Reviewer 2: Hi @momo-jun @heesung-sn 

I have updated the changes in apache/pulsar#19193 to solve the admin API link conflict. Please help review it when you have time.

Reviewer 2: Hi @momo-jun 

https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/19193 has been merged.

> Set topic policies | N/A | Refer to [Set topic-level dispatch rate](https://pulsar.apache.org/admin-rest-api/#operation/persistent_setDispatchRate). | Refer to [Set subscription-level dispatch rate](https://pulsar.apache.org/admin-rest-api/#operation/getSubscriptionLevelDispatchRate).<br />It applies to all subscriptions in a topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set topic policies | N/A | Refer to [Set topic-level dispatch rate](pathname:///admin-rest-api/#operation/persistent_setDispatchRate). | Refer to [Set subscription-level dispatch rate](pathname:///admin-rest-api/#operation/getSubscriptionLevelDispatchRate).<br />It applies to all subscriptions in a topic.
```

Author: Thanks for spotting this. Resolved.

> Set topic policies | N/A | Refer to [Set topic-level dispatch rate](pathname:///admin-rest-api/?version=@pulsar:version_number@/#operation/PersistentTopics_setDispatchRate). | Refer to [Set subscription-level dispatch rate](pathname:///admin-rest-api/?version=@pulsar:version_number@/#operation/Namespaces_setDispatchRate).<br />It applies to all subscriptions in a topic.

Author: @poorbarcode can you please double-check the accuracy of the links and descriptions?
Regarding the dispatch rate setting, I only found the namespace-level API. Does it equal `subscription-level` here?

:::note

> The dispatch rate limits configured through the above three approaches take effect with priorities, which is "topic policies" > "namespace policies" > "broker configurations". For example, if you have configured the dispatch rate limit for a subscription using all these three approaches, only the one configured through “topic policies” takes effect.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The dispatch rate limits configured through the above three approaches take effect with priorities, which is "topic policies" > "namespace policies" > "broker configurations". For example, if you have configured the dispatch rate limit for a subscription using all these three approaches, only the one configured through "topic policies" takes effect.
```

““ are quotes in Chinese input methods?

Author: Thanks for spotting this. Seems this is another case similar to the apostrophe when drafting content in Google docs. The double quotes were typed in English IME but displayed as so... I'll get it fixed.

  - When `preciseDispatcherFlowControl` is enabled, Pulsar considers the number of messages per entry. This parameter takes effect when the broker reads entries from the bookies.
  - When `dispatchThrottlingOnBatchMessageEnabled` is enabled, Pulsar ignores the number of messages per entry. This parameter takes effect when the broker updates the counter after sending messages to the client.

:::

## Limitations

Message dispatch throttling may cause messages over-delivered per unit of time due to the following reasons:

1. **The broker may read more entries or bytes from the bookies than the throttling limit.**

   a) **The byte size of messages delivered to the client may exceed the configured threshold.**
   
     When you set the dispatch rate limit in bytes/throttling-period (`dispatchThrottlingRateInByte`/`ratePeriodInSecond`), the broker calculates $$the \ number \ of \ entries \ to \ read \ from \ bookies$$ in one throttling period through the following equation:
   

>      $$

Reviewer 5: I found there are many symbols `$$` and `\`, it seems that they are not valid markdown symbols.

Author: @gaoran10 Thanks for noticing it. I should have attached all the preview screenshots to make this clear:)

This is a new style to highlight the unknown of the match equation. The preview looks good as follows.

<img width="1056" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60642177/224476449-9fad61c3-1795-4a1b-94d2-2479f03862e2.png">

Reviewer 5: Oh, got it, thanks.

      
     The broker uses the average publish size in preference to the average dispatch size. If the average publish size is unavailable, then it uses the average dispatch size. When none of the two metrics are available, the broker only reads one entry at the first attempt.

   **b) The number of messages delivered to the client may exceed the configured threshold.**
     
     When you set the dispatch rate limit in message-count/throttling-period (`dispatchThrottlingRateInMsg`/`ratePeriodInSecond`) and batching (`batch-send`) is enabled, the broker counts an entry as one message (despite the message count per entry) and calculates $$the \ number \ of \ entries \ to \ read \ from \ bookies$$ through the following equation:
      
     $$
     The \ number \ of \ entries \ to \ read \ from \ bookies = {{The \ total \ number \ of \ messages \ to \ read} \over{The \ average \ message \ count \ per \ entry} \ (=1)}
     $$

     Since there is a number of messages per entry, the number of messages delivered to the client always exceeds or equals the configured threshold.

   **Workaround**

>    Configuring `preciseDispatcherFlowControl` or `dispatchThrottlingOnBatchMessageEnabled` can mitigate the over-delivery issue. For example, turning on `preciseDispatcherFlowControl` can mitigate the limitation by pre-decrementing the quota using the approximated average message count per entry. See [Throttling configurations](#throttling-configurations) for more details.

Reviewer 3: If this mitigation also helps the second limitation, please move this to the bottom of this section and mention these configs can help both limitations.

Author: @poorbarcode can this workaround resolve the limitation caused by the second case? I thought the over-delivery limitation can be caused by two cases, and this workaround only serves the first one. Can you please clarify this?

Reviewer 2: Hi @momo-jun 
> can this workaround resolve the limitation caused by the second case? I thought the over-delivery limitation can be caused by two cases

Yes, you are right. Thanks for @heesung-sn
